imagine this you're fast asleep when all
of a sudden you're awoken and not by
your alarm clock your eyes open and
there's a demon sitting on your chest
pinning you down you try to open your
mouth and scream but no sound comes out
you try to get up and run away but you
realize that you are completely
immobilized the demon is trying to
suffocate you but you can't fight back
you've awoken into your dream and it's a
nightmare it sounds like a Stephen King
movie but it's actually a medical
condition called sleep paralysis and
about half of the population has
experienced a strange phenomenon at
least once in their life this panic
inducing episode of coming face-to-face
with the creatures from your nightmares
can last anywhere from seconds to
minutes and may involve visual or
auditory hallucinations of an evil
spirit or an out-of-body feeling like
you're floating some have even mistaken
sleep paralysis for an encounter with a
ghost
or an alien abduction in 1867 dr. Silas
where Mitchell was the first medical
professional to study sleep paralysis
the subject awakes to consciousness of
his environment but is incapable of
moving a muscle
lying to all appearance still asleep he
has really engaged for a struggle for
movement fraught with acute mental
distress could he but managed to stir
the spell would vanish instantly even
though dr. Mitchell was the first to
observe patients in a state of sleep
paralysis it's so common that nearly
every culture throughout time is that
some kind of paranormal explanation for
it in medieval Europe you might think
that in Incubus a sex hungry demon in
male form visited you in the night in
Scandinavia the mayor a damned woman is
responsible for visiting sleepers and
sitting on their rib cages in Turkey a
jinn hold you down and tries to strangle
you in Thailand p.m. bruises you while
you sleep in the southern United States
the hag comes for you in Mexico you can
blame Sabri say el muerto the dead
person on you in Greece Mora sits upon
your chest
and tries to asphyxiate you in Nepal
kayak the ghost resides under the
staircase it may be easier to blame
sleep paralysis on evil spirits because
what's actually happening in your brain
is much harder to explain modern
scientists believe that sleep paralysis
is caused by an abnormal overlap of the
REM rapid eye movement and waking stages
of sleep during a normal REM cycle
you're experiencing a number of sensory
stimuli in the form of a dream and your
brain is unconscious and fully asleep
during your dream special
neurotransmitters are released which
paralyze almost all of your muscles
that's called REM atonia it's what keeps
you from running in your bed when you're
being chased in your dreams during an
episode of sleep paralysis you're
experiencing normal components of REM
you're dreaming and your muscles are
paralyzed only your brain is conscious
and wide awake this is what causes you
to imagine that you're having an
encounter with a menacing presence so
this explains the hallucinations but
what about the feelings of panic
strangling choking chest pressure that
so many people describe well during REM
the function that keeps you from acting
out your dreams REM atonia also removes
voluntary control of your breathing your
breath becomes more shallow and rapid
you take in more carbon dioxide and
experience a small blockage of your
airway during a sleep paralysis episode
a combination of your body's fear
response to a perceived attack by an
evil creature and your brain being wide
awake while your body is in an REM sleep
state triggers a response for you to
take in more oxygen that makes you gasp
for air but you can't because REM atonia
has removed control of your breath this
struggle for air while your body sleeps
creates a perceived sensation of
pressure on the chest or suffocation
while a few people experience sleep
paralysis regularly and it may be linked
to sleep disorders such as narcolepsy
many who experience an episode of sleep
paralysis do so and frequently perhaps
only once in a lifetime so you can rest
easy knowing that an evil entity is not
trying to haunt possess strangle or
suffocate you save that for the horror
film